our woods hole people had made any real
comparisons between them so first i chose lamont
one to use here at the same time that the regular
woods holding was being used and then chose
another one later and we kept on experimenting
until we got the one we think was the best that was
the best another problem was out of the sound
source and so we built Heretofore at Woods Hole
we'd been using sparkers, so we built a big
sparker. It was bigger than the one that the others
had here, that's right. And then finally we went on
to air guns, and now continue to use those. Another
aspect was the receiving of the detection of the
echoes, and so we made a new kind of a detection
array. Not really very complicated, but one with
about 200 detectors in it. And the people at Woods
Hole began using that about the same time, so it's
hard to know who was first on it. Then we wanted to
improve the system, so eventually we started
digitizing the single channel. That was really
near the end of the geological survey
participation. And then after it was digitized,
then we could stack and deconvolve and do other
things with it. And then finally that led to using
two multi-channel arrays. The ship is out now with
a 12-channel multi, 12-channel assessment
reflection equipment.
What sort of conclusions are you reaching with
sounding at this time? Well, what we are mainly
interested in and have been here at the
institution is to learn much about the origin of
the continental slope and the shelf and rise, in
effect, to know why continents exist and what the
difference is between the continents and the
ocean basins. In the process of doing that, of
course, then we learn a lot about the structure of
the continental margin. particularly the shelf
and the slope. And very often this structure shows
the potential, the areas of potential oil and gas
provinces. It doesn't locate places to drill. It
doesn't locate oil fields, but it locates wide
regions that have potential. And on the east coast
here, one of the first things that we did was to show
that was to compare the seismic reflection work
that we did with previous work that Lamont had done
with seismic refraction and to verify and extend
the presence of large potential oil and gas
distributions beneath the shelf, actually
beneath George's Bank in what is now known as the
Baltimore Canyon region and farther south near
Jacksonville. Those areas were mapped about
1963, 63 or 64,
with the statement as necessary to drill holes to
find out whether there actually is any oil and gas
present. The areas still haven't been leased
offshore. And so it's clear that the problem
facing the people of the United States is a lack of
interest in the part of the government on finding
energy supplies rather than to find sources of
revenue for the Treasury. So, of course, this sort
of thinking soon led to an emphasis on political
oceanography, and there's a tremendous amount of
that, for example, by the United Nations, with
manganese nodules and other things. So it's a
different kind of a field. I've been interested in
that, because it's just one more obstacle for
marine geologists.
And you remained then in this kind of work here at
Woods Hole. Yes. I've been here now 15 years, and
most of that time has been spent on geophysics. And
it's now time for another change, or it was a few
years ago. So I've changed now to synthesis of
large aspects of oceanography. first by working
with one of my associates, a former student,
Elazar Yachupi, on a memoir for the Western North
Atlantic Ocean. It was published by the American
Association of Petroleum Geologists. This was in
1972, which was a pretty good time for it to come
out. And it was kind of a parallel to the book of
Southern California. And now we are working
together on another one, a synthesis for the
entire Atlantic Ocean. 60 degrees south to 60
degrees north. That's the stratigraphy of the
Atlantic, the structure of it, the sediments, the
rocks, the relationship to the biology and to the
physical oceanography, currents and waves and so
forth. So this will keep us out of mischief for
another couple years. Yeah, I should think so.
I have now several questions concerning what
amounts to the development of oceanography in
terms of money. By the way, how did you miss service
in the O&R office? I was asked at the very beginning
in 1950, I think, but I was rather more interested
in teaching. And in the research, it was
completely evident that one can't do research
administration at the same time. In fact, many
people make the mistake of thinking they can
teach, do research, and administer all at the same
time, and no one is successful at doing all three of
them. You can do one successfully and sometimes
one and a half successfully. So going to ONR would
have been the wrong direction. I chose the same way
as far as being dean here, too. You can't
administer as a dean and do any effective research
either. button, so therefore your career has
always pointed towards research and teaching.
Yeah, and since I left the University of Illinois,
University of Southern California, not
teaching. I taught there 15 or 16 years and enjoyed
it very much. In fact, the students wrote a little
book in commemoration when I left there,
dedicated
to me. But the After 15 years of teaching, you don't
really expect to find many new experiences in
teaching. So I would rather go to something new and
different rather than repeat the old. I have had
one or two students here. One is the number one. Now
the number one is really marine geologist.
But when you came to Woods Hole, was there even a
teaching program here? No, that didn't begin
until five years later. OK. six years later in
1968. I was the first dean, acting dean. An acting
dean is, of course, by definition, a mouse
learning to be a rat.
In the beginnings, if I may use that word, like 45,
46, 47 and so, it was almost as if block grants were
given to institutions. by ONR and what have you.
And then you drew your monies that way. I didn't
think the ONR began until 1950. Well, it didn't.
I'm talking about the first grants to come out of
the Naval office and then in the early years of the
ONR. Yeah. At that time, I didn't ask for any
because just going into teaching, there was
enough to do there for a while. OK. That was what I
wanted to know. When did you start? And then in
addition, Captain Alan Hancock, who was a great
beneficiary of the University of Southern
California, built a new ship called the Valero IV,
and it was available in 1947 for cruises in all
phases of oceanography. So I used that ship quite a
lot in those days. So you had enough ship time then
without looking for research rates? Yeah. When
did you begin to have your research funded by the
government?
We started working on the sort of expensive parts
of the
sediment work, where we had to buy new equipment
and pay salaries of assistants and so forth. So I
guess the first of those was probably about 1948, I
suppose, after we'd gotten some cores from using
Laurel 4. That was with Rittenberg and
Wilson-Ower. With whom did you make contact first
for money?
Probably Gordon Little, who was the head of the ONR
at that time. I think that's who it was. He's now, I
don't know where he is now. Noah. Oh, yes, that's
right. He went to Noah by way of lucky. Right. Did
you...
Did you find it necessary then to issue a formal
proposal? Probably. I've forgotten now, but
yeah, I would have. I made proposals whenever
there were agencies to make them to, and never had
any great problem with the money. In fact, Shell
Oil Company provided, I think, about $40,000 for
general work on on porphyrin pigments in the
sediments, which we're interested in, and that
money hasn't been so much of a problem. For the
geological survey work, I think the budget there,
not counting salaries of their own people, came to
something like an average of half a million a year,
probably.
And then at the end of that, started work on an
African program, the entire west coast of Africa,
and $2.5 million was provided. That includes the
price, the cost of the ship time, by
ideally an half a decade of ocean exploration. It
was a five-year program. Oh, yes, and before that,
then, I'd done work along the Asian coast, from
Korea down to Java, and this was partly funded by by
the Navy through mainly bureau ships, I think, and
by National Science Foundation. And a lot of it is
just done without any
funding. But I'm to take it, though, that largely
that money was not any problem in terms of... No, it
didn't seem to be. It hasn't seemed to be. Is that
still true? Well, it is for me because a couple
years ago, I was given a big, low chair here, which
provides salary and allows me to work on what I want
to work on. So if at the time I'm holding that, if I
went out to seek funds to do specified work, it'd be
a poor use of the funds for the chair. With the funds
for the chair, I can work on the synthesis here
without spending time raising funds. Good, good.
It's your impression that funds available for
oceanography or declining? Well, I think the
funds are increasing. But the funds are declining
if you put it in terms of constant dollars. For
example, here, that's more political
oceanography. But here at the Oceanographic
Institution, the funds in 1971 were about $12
million for operations. And in 76, they were $23
million. But if you put them in terms of $1967, it's
constant funding. That means then that
effectively the $11 additional revenue between
19, the annual revenue between 1971 and 77 really
is just keeping up with the devaluation of the
dollar. Now, it's clear that that the funds, even
the inflated funds for small organizations,
small oceanographic organizations, are falling
and have fallen. And that's not unreasonable
because there are only three or four places that
are large enough and have people who are
experienced enough in all fields of oceanography
so they can tackle large problems. Of course,
there's an argument about whether people,
research workers, should work on smaller and
smaller problems know more and more about less and
less, or the other way, less and less about more and
more. But in any case, the large institutions,
that is, Woods Hole, Lamont, Scripps, chiefly
those are ones where large problems can be tackled
and are being tackled, large multi-institution,
multinational programs. are being undertaken
just mostly by those. The other places sometimes
supply individuals to work, but they can't,
mostly they can't be deeply involved in it,
because they don't have the people. Now, the
funding itself is sort of everything. For a
program like Africa, I considered the funding to
be one quarter of the job. The politics, another
quarter, you have to get permission from. And
there's a lot of problems, even in spite of the in
spite of and not helped by the State Department, so
to speak. Then there's the problem of technology.
You have to invent new equipment to improve on the
previous ones. And then finally, there's the
science that you do it all for. So in effect, a large
program calls for all four of these. And there are a
lot of large programs that are developed. In fact,
one can tie this to different phases of
oceanography. For biology. the greatest
paradigm or generalization was that of Darwin's,
who showed the effects of environment on the
production of species and the distribution of
species. And since that time, lots of the
biologists have been sort of proving that and not
so much developing new approaches. It's the broad
generalization of more than 100 years ago that's
kind of rested new approaches in the field of
biology. In chemistry, on the other hand, the
challenge of exploration of about 100 years ago, I
had a man named Dittmar who did the chemistry of the
waters and found that the ions bear a fairly
constant ratio of each other throughout the
oceans. That was his main generalization. It was a
new generalization, and it's a useful one. Now the
main interest is to find in what ways the elements
depart from the close ratio. In other words, what
are the anomalies, and what are those anomalies
due to? Some are due to evaporation, some to influx
of seawater, some to, many of them, to biological
influences. Others are due to seafloor
circulation associated with the plate
tectonics. For physical oceanography, the main
generalization was by a man named Bjorknes in the
in Norway, and he showed that you could measure the
dynamic height of the ocean surface and from that
compute currents in the same way you'd do currents
with wind, with meteorological observations.
That was a broad generalization. And that was
followed for a long time. Now the main approach is
the knowledge that those currents make up only a
small amount of the movement in the ocean, perhaps
only 1%. The rest is turbulence. And in order to
learn about broad turbulence, it's necessary to
make synoptic observations at many points at the
same time. So the physical oceanographers mainly
are dealing with buoys. Many buoys in the ocean
record for several months. The geologists were
very slow, in a way. They were the last to form a
broad generalization. And that was formed only a
decade ago. It's the plate tectonics hypothesis.
or theory, and now that's served as a framework
into which many kinds of marine geology can now be
fitted. How did we get into this? We got into this
because after these generalizations, we have to
look for anomalies and details that weren't
appreciated and weren't needed and weren't
understood beforehand. And these are more
expensive ways of working. Now, in order to do
this, we have several programs going on here. One
was the famous expedition using the submarines in
the middle Atlantic Ocean. We wanted to make a
continuation of that in a different environment,
so we made studies in the Cayman Trough last year,
and then this year, similar sort of thing in the
Galapagos rise from the area sea floor spreading
in Galapagos. Each of these three areas happens to
be areas of active seafloor spreading, but each is
vastly different. Each has unexpected fallout.
Galapagos people came back all enthusiastic
because in addition to the very useful geological
observations, they found many deep-sea clams a
foot or so long living at a depth of 2,800 meters.
There's no obvious source of food for them except
oxidation of the hydrogen sulfide from the
escaping bottom water. that was escaping bottom
water. It's seawater that had been drawn into the
area of seafloor spreading and expelled after it
heated and picked up some elements and lost its
oxygen, picked up hydrogen sulfide. Anyway, all
these multidisciplinary,
multi-equipment types of studies are very
expensive. And the small wind stations cannot
cannot man them or staff them usually.
Go ahead. In your work towards a broad synthesis
that you're aiming for, do you see a work towards
broad synthesis in all fields of oceanography?
Yeah, certainly that's true. I mentioned the
biology, the chemistry, the physics, and the
geology. The chemistry one is well illustrated by
the geosex work, which very sophisticated
equipment was used for investigating the
anomalies of ratios and other things. The biology
is farther behind. The biology work has taken some
interesting new approaches, however, though,
measuring the metabolic activity of benthic
organisms through using submarines to place
units on the bottom to trap water associated with
organisms and find out how much, how fast the
oxygen is used to recover the equipment for the
submarine and measure the changes. One of the
interesting things is to find that the metabolic
activity is very low, therefore the animals may
live for several hundred years, maybe some of them
a thousand years. This first came to light in a way
by finding that when we lost our submarine for ten
and a half months, the sandwiches that were in the
submarine were pretty well preserved. When they
finally recovered, though, they'd been
destroyed by bacteria at the surface. Butter and
bacteria are not used to sandwiches.
But it's cold and high pressure, and both the cold
and the high pressure reduces the metabolic
activity. If you were offering advice to a young
oceanographer on what direction he should direct
his career, what would you tell him? Well, this
happens very often. I tell them to get a
first-class degree, bachelor's degree, in one of
the major fields of oceanography before they
start specializing in the ocean so that they'll
know enough about one field to be able to handle it
well. The places that have turned out bachelor's
degree oceanographers give a smattering of
things that people don't generally know enough to
do any effective work. I don't know of any
graduates from that who've gotten their
doctorates, but there may be some. I recommend
that you take, if you were to be a geologist, that
you take all two courses in biology, chemistry,
and physics. In fact, you ought to have a thorough
background so as to be able to build that. Now, this
is different from what the students nowadays want
to do. Most students want to become specialists. I
always used to tell my students that they should be
generalists, and they'll know when to hire a
specialist. They'll also know when the
specialist has come to the point of diminishing
returns and be able to fire him. And some of the
students have taken that advice. They're now
presidents of companies
and so forth. And after he's received, then, firm
scientific education, and is choosing a career in
oceanography. What branch of oceanography
should he move into? Of course, that depends
entirely on the man, what the man's interests are.
I have recommended to some people in each of the
different fields. It really depends, and the
man's interests are usually developed
accidentally through through having a family
friend who may be a geologist or a family friend who
may be a biologist.
And it's just an accident what people become
interested in. Very few people, I suppose very few
people, go into a field that a vocational expert is
selected for. I don't know of any. But it's usually
an accident. Mine was an accident. of getting a
grafting job with Shepard Purex. If another job
available to Illinois, as far as I know, that was
the only one, then I might be in some other field.
Many fields are interesting. Pacto was once going
to be an archaeologist, and I talked with a
professional archaeologist, and he gave about
the same advice that Ravel had given. a field where
in order to be successful you have to have a private
income of your own which i didn't happen to have but
now i've been finding it interesting to work in the
field of archaeology of the ocean floor and i still
come back to it occasionally archaeology of the
ocean floor yeah sure you don't mean nautical
archaeology no not necessarily for example At the
height of the past, of the last, latest glacier,
about 14,000 years ago, the whole shelf was
exposed because sea level was low. Man lived out on
the shelf. There were lots of elephants out there.
We'd find their teeth and so forth. Lots of
oysters, lots of fish, lots of birds, lots of small
games. There's no reason why man shouldn't have
been there. And on the east coast of North America,
lots of dated, carbon-dated manned sites are
known on land as far back as 12,000 years. There's a
great influx of people about 12,000 years ago. In
fact, it's thought that as these people
progressed across northern North America, they
practiced overkill and had to move out as they
eliminated the elephants and the bison and the
larger animals. And so, people lived on the shelf.
We really haven't very good evidence for their
being there, but we have good evidence of being on
the shore, and they certainly would have gone on
the shelf, regardless of whether the shelf was a
whether they knew they were on the ocean floor or
not. For example, if you ask the people in New York
City if they're living on the ocean floor, of
course they'd say no. But if all the glaciers were
to melt, the sea level would rise about 60 meters,
about 200 feet. It would cover all except the about
30-story buildings. So they're living on the
ocean floor, so no reason why people shouldn't
have lived on the ocean floor before. I had no idea
there was... You're not systematically
cataloging sites out there, though, are you?
Yeah, well, not so much sites as things relate to
it. We found about 50 elephant teeth on the
seafloor and probably at least a dozen freshwater
peats on the seafloor that we accommodated. The
peats show that there were forests and meadows.
The elephants, some elephants occupied the
meadows and some of the forests. A lot of other
animals, too. Deer, elk, sloths. The small
animals, like rabbits and so forth, have bones
that are too fragile to be preserved. At least we
haven't found any yet. There are probably some who
went to the right places. And there had to be early
man out there, too. But man's burials, lots of the
early man perhaps didn't make burials. So bones
just decompose at the surface. And if they buried
them, then of course, that's harder to find them
then. But it's an important thing. Now, of course,
nowadays we have people in the government bureaus
who insist that archaeological work be done
before offshore development is done. But there's
a difference between the requirements and the
efficiency of the search. the response to that
requirement. I don't think they're fine with her.
Most are found by amateurs, I think. Yeah. Yeah.
But I didn't know that they had impact studies for
offshore. Yeah, they do. They all shall not build
offshore wells without first having made an
archaeological survey. And if you find evidence
of it, then, of course, you're not supposed to
build a well there. But same way for roads on the
land.